---
title: "Mahogany Pieces"
pretext: "A brief memoir about chess, my personal attachment to the game, the lessons that I have garnered from this sport, and the therapeutic energy that this game has pumped into my veins."
cover_image: "/articles/mahogany.jpg"
date: "OCTOBER 17, 2022"
reading_time: "5 MIN"
tag: "CHESS"
---

I softly ran my hand through the smooth mahogany wood. I had felt this before. Closing my eyes to soak in the nostalgia, I smiled and caressed the intricate chess pieces that now lay in front of me. For a moment I was 9 again, excitedly sliding chess pieces against the board - the scraping of wood against wood as it punctuated my thoughts and brought to life the hours of theory I had had to memorize for this game. Blood pulsing through my veins, I took it one move at a time. Each move drawing me closer to my desired outcome - checkmate! 

As I grew from a young boy into adolescence, I found that the number of decisions I had to make concerning my future was alarming and quite frankly frustrating. I always worried about whether I was making the right choice. The future terrified me. The premise that there were a quintillion different possibilities of what could happen an hour from now was, in fact, very disturbing. Chess for me had always been therapeutic. My precocious mind would stare for hours at the 8 by 8 checkered board that presented so many possibilities and outcomes. From the first move, until the last is a descent into chaos. After the first moves, 400 different board setups exist. After the second pair of turns, there are 197,742 possible games. After 3 moves from each player, there are 121 million different possible game setups. The permutations increase exponentially from there. Much like life, the weight of the choices I had to make weighed down on me. However, chess taught me to think deeply and take things one move at a time - dealing with my anxiety and allowing me to coordinate my pieces and win. This was a sentiment I used when I encountered life’s most pressing challenges. I learnt to take it one move at a time, one day at a time, one decision at a time as I made small steps to big outcomes. Whether it was a small habit or a tiny decision, I saw it as a well-timed move to bring about success. 

It was fascinating to realize that no matter how much preparation I soaked in before a match, the exhilarating blend of excited and nervous energy always seemed to throw me off. Although a chess game consists of 2 players sliding pieces along a board, emotional stability is a key component in victory. I learnt to balance my thoughts and emotions to keep a clear head as I played. I understood that when the mountains of life presented themselves, the best way to tackle challenges was to keep a clear head and focus on the issue at hand. 

Although I do not play as much chess as I did years ago, the lessons I have learnt from this simple game will stay with me for the rest of my life. The promotion of a pawn to a queen at the 8th rank showing me that when you swim against the current and weather adversity, the results can often be fruitful. I’ve learnt to think creatively to solve spontaneous problems that arise throughout the game. I’ve seen many game preparations rendered useless when the opponent decides to play a variation that I am not familiar with. Much like in life, I have learnt that in this world of constant change we must learn to be adaptable. To look at the current and set my sails to reach my desired destination.  

At 17, although the opening stages of this game called life are still being played, I am driven to take my problems one step at a time. Though I am no longer sliding mahogany wood pieces across the board, I am learning to creatively tackle problems and coordinate my resources to produce an optimal result. To strategize, to navigate through the ranks, to deal with failure, and to win. 